# Stage 3 proposals which require implementer coordination

Many JavaScript implementations ship proposals which are in Stage 3, given that that stage generally implies a high level of stability and completeness. However, there are several circumstances in which a Stage 3 proposal may be considered to “require implementer coordination”:

1. If consensus for Stage 3 were only given by the committee conditionally on certain issues being resolved (could be any of the following, or more).
1. If there are certain open questions around normative semantics (e.g., “bugs”) which the champion group agrees are not yet resolved. In general, for Stage 3 proposals, consensus has been established on all normative semantics; if someone disagrees with that consensus, it does not automatically make those questions open again. The typical case here would be a bug discovered in the course of implementation, whereas design concerns should generally be resolved to enter Stage 3.
1. If certain necessary integrations into host environments, e.g., HTML, are still under consideration without a clear resolution, a proposal is likely not ready to ship in the context of web browsers and may be unstable generally.
1. If implementers expect an especially high level of difficulty/risk with this proposal that can only be assessed with implementation experience in one or more engines, then they may adopt a working mode with multiple engines implementing in parallel and sharing experience, possibly feeding back into the normative semantics of the proposal, before shipping. Note that, in general, it is expected that some implementations will still be in progress in implementing while others go ahead and ship, however.

Any changes to a Stage 3 proposal require committee consensus to adopt. If changes are anticipated for one reason or another, a proposal can be seen as “requiring implementer coordination”. These conditions have long been discussed in committee and noted in meeting minutes, but recent cases of engines accidentally shipping features “too soon” motivate ensuring that the documentation of these conditions is made as clear as possible, so that the appropriate coordination can take place beforehand.

A Stage 3 proposal being marked as “requires implementer coordination” is distinct from demoting it to Stage 2. Demoting a proposal to Stage 2 requires consensus to achieve, and consensus to re-promote to Stage 3, whereas marking a proposal as “requires implementer coordination” is a ligher-weight operation requiring only documentation, not committee consensus.

> Note: The committee has considered adopting a formal “Stage 3.5” indicating readiness-to-ship, but there is currently no consensus in committee to adopt an additional consensus-seeking step. Some committee members are concerned that another consensus-seeking stage could slow committee velocity. Instead, the designation of “not ready to ship” is purely documentation rather than a process change. Engines may still make their own calls about whether to ship Stage 3 proposals, and there is no shift in TC39’s development model. The committee may still consider a formal “Stage 3.5” in the future.

In the proposals repository, in the table for Stage 3, there is a column for “requires implementer coordination”. By default, proposals which reach Stage 3 are not marked here. If there is a reason to mark a proposal as “not ready to ship”, it should generally be visible in meeting notes or an issue in the repository.

Proposal champions are often the ones best positioned to assess whether a proposal requires further coordination and should be the ones determining whether the table should be marked as “requires implementer coordination” (e.g., by noting this in committee, so it’s recorded in meeting minutes and then the table is updated), but in cases of absence/negligence of champions and serious issues arising, others in committee may mark the table appropriately. This document does not attempt to describe a process for resolving disputes in this area.

There is no procedural content to the “requires implementer coordination” marking, it is only documentation to assist in coordination of the committee and implementers, and not subject to committee consensus. Of course, a proposal which much of the committee feels is not ready to ship may have a hard time getting to Stage 4.

Once a JavaScript feature starts shipping in web browsers or other compatibility-sensitive environments, it becomes very difficult or impossible to make changes later. Remember to treat all decisions about declaring a feature as no longer requiring implementer coordination, as well as actually shipping it in an environment you control, with care.
